My name is Blaine Garst.
I'm the manager of one of
the Java groups at Apple.
And what we're going to talk
about today is Java in Depth.
I want to just jump into it.
I'm actually going to try
to have some fun today.
So hopefully you'll
have some fun with me.
We're going to try to do a
few demos and show you what's
really going on inside Mac OS X,
inside the Java.
The demo gods struck early.
At 8:00 this morning,
the system wouldn't boot
off of our boot disk.
We got that figured out at 8:30.
At 10:00 to 8:00,
we figured out that our login usernames
weren't quite the same as what they
were the last time we ran the demo.
They're striking early,
but I think by the time
we get to that point,
we'll have things pretty much in control.
So, so far at this conference you
heard from Steve Naroff about
the overview of what we're doing,
where we've been, where we are now,
and some of what we're trying to go,
where we're trying to go.
You may have slipped over and listened
to the QuickTime talk after that,
found out how to do really cool
graphics programming on Mac OS X,
much as you do on 9.
You may have gone to
Pete Steinhauer's talk on how
to cook up a Java application.
I'm not going to try to
repeat very much of...
those previous slides nor the performance
talk either but what i do want to talk
about is um some of the stuff that's
that's uh that didn't get talked about
so this is the talk where you get to
ask questions where we're going to try
to give you detail more detail more
type that when project builder doesn't
quite do what it's supposed to be doing
for you quite yet some of the tricks
we use or some of the things we have
to use in the interim until it does so
It's 9 o'clock.
Have you had your Java yet?
Pop quiz.
What do the following
screenshots all have in common?
Setup Assistant,
the first program that runs
after you boot Mac OS X.
Network Manager,
when you find yourself in a strange
and unworldly NFS environment.
This is the program you
run to untangle yourself.
Blast app, source code,
and a game that ships on your
Ships on your CD.
An applet, perhaps you're kind of
getting the idea here.
JBuilder, you saw that running yesterday.
It unfortunately is not
shipping on your CD,
and you're supposed to go talk
to Blake if you would like to see
it shipping on your CD sometime.
QuickTime Digital Media,
as I mentioned before.
And of course, the answer is they're
all written in Java.
Now, this isn't supposed to
be all that remarkable,
is it?
But I think it's really kind of neat.
Java, I mean,
these applications are kind of
like when you walk up to Mac OS X,
they're like the walls of the house.
I mean, you know, you've got a TV room,
you've got a kitchen,
you've got your living room and stuff.
I mean, when you're inside the house of
Mac OS X running these applications,
you don't really think about how they
run or you're not really supposed to.
But for the folks of
you inside this room,
when the wiring is what
is important to you,
that is why you're here.
So what we're going to talk about is
what's inside the walls of that house,
you know, the Java wiring in detail.
So as a brief overview,
we're going to talk about the
wiring in a certain degree of depth.
We're going to talk about once
you get your app up and running.
And.
More or less working, you know,
how to run a little bit of
profiling stuff against it,
where we'd like to go with that,
where we where we think
we'll be going with that.
How to do some debugging right now,
both for your benefit
and possibly for ours.
There are a few things that you
do to augment your applications,
so we're going to try to go through a
little bit more detail on how to do that.
In other words, how to use JNI in our
kind of environment,
how you have to do it today versus
how we'd like to see you do it,
and a few other topics.
So let's just get going.
When you write your Java application,
what you think about are
the classes you write and,
of course, when the program is running,
the data it takes up.
You can't just go and read data
forever because eventually,
despite what we do in terms of memory
reclamation and things like that,
if you're just leaking memory
by holding onto it forever,
it's not going to work.
The rest of the system, however,
is a little bit more complex.
So, you're going to have to do a lot of
work to get the data out of your system.
What's under those covers is the stuff
that we generally worry about at Apple,
and we try to make the bottom part of
this diagram as efficient as possible.
So I'd just like to talk... so let
me go through the diagram first.
So, of course,
you've got the JDK classes,
all... I can't remember how
many thousands of them there
are that you might be using.
The runtime,
which does all that synchronization
and garbage collection and compilation,
the compiler below that.
And then the runtime,
which does all that synchronization
and garbage collection and compilation,
the compiler below that.
On the side, what I have in green are
JNI support libraries,
both the ones that we
use to keep things going,
and I just put two up there.
We have about nine.
And the JNI libraries that
you might be writing as well,
because you're bringing across some
legacy code and stuff like that.
Below us all are the frameworks
that are common to Mac OS X.
Things like Carbon,
things like the kernel, things like,
you know,
all that other stuff that's below
us that we all are clients of.
Now, private data is a little thin there.
It's actually... private data
extends all the way down the
side of that diagram in truth.
I just wanted to put up the sort of
the Java private data in this diagram.
But let's talk about the
Java VM first of all.
If you were at Pete's talk yesterday,
you saw that...
The Java VM framework is sort of the
fuse panel for Java inside Mac OS X.
We have inside that framework
lots and lots of stuff.
We have the virtual machines
that execute your Java bytecodes.
We have all of our system
jars in the classes folder,
things like that.
We have the JNI support libraries wedged
into some other little subdirectory.
We have headers because this
is a C environment for those
of you writing JNI code.
We have a few headers for that.
Actually, probably on DP4,
a few more headers than we
really need to have out there.
So the ones that you should be thinking
about are pretty much just JNI.
We have the Java home with the system
properties file and there's a whole
bunch of stuff and I'll let you
wander around and take a look at that.
But that is sort of the
moral equivalent to,
if you're an MRJ programmer,
the MRJ libraries folder.
So in DP4, I'll tell you the truth.
[Transcript missing]
So we do some trickery such that that's
all that any program that needs to
do JNI ever sees when it does a link.
That way, if it ever comes to pass that
you need to switch your Java VMs,
you can reset that one symbolic link,
which in Macintosh terms is an
alias really on HFS file systems,
to be the VM of your choice.
So we ship, in some ways, three VMs.
We ship Hotspot Client
Compiler as the default VM.
We also have a debug version
of that same technology,
and I'll tell you a little
bit about that later,
and again, the classic interpreter.
So there are several ways to get at that.
I really hope that you'd never
have to reset that symbolic link,
honestly, because we do have lots
of ways to get to it.
Here are two of them.
One is you can simply type
-classic or -hotspot in order to
have the JNI invocation code pick
the right library to go after,
load up, and initialize with.
If you can't get to it via the command
line or that's inconvenient for you,
you can use an environment variable.
The Java JVM library environment
variable is also looked at.
And in that last line,
this is the preferred way to get to the,
say, the debug version of Hotspot.
Now, I want to caution you,
the debug version of Hotspot is
slower because it has thousands
of assertions compiled in.
And so lots of C++ inlining that makes
things really fast isn't inlined,
and so it's considerably slower.
But you're not really going to get to it.
You don't really care about
that if you're at that stage.
And I'll tell you when you
might get to that stage.
So here's a little bit about profiling.
The JDK 1.2,
the Java 2 specification for the runtime,
has a very nice interface.
It's called the
Java Virtual Machine Profiling Interface.
And the implementation of that for the
classic interpreter works pretty well.
But the implementation for that
in the hotspot interpreter does
not quite run there in your DP4.
We are working really hard with our
folks in developer technical support
to figure out a pathway to get you
some updates to what's on your CD.
I mean, the bits that are on your
CD are about two weeks old.
So that's a lifetime for us.
So what we have running up on
stage and what you see on your
CDs is slightly different.
And it's our goal to try to
get you what we have on stage.
Including some project builder stuff
out to you via the web very soon.
So in the interim, however,
we're going to be working
on a lot of things.
So Hotspot itself is just chock
full of very interesting technology.
So one of the things that makes Hotspot
really good is that it chooses which
methods need to be compiled on
the fly and based on their usage
patterns which methods can and
ought to be inlined inside of there.
In order to do that,
it has its own sampling
technology to figure out,
"Hey,
what's going on?" So every now and then,
clock ticks wise,
it goes and takes a look at the
stacks and figures out which
methods are being interpreted.
And so an interesting side effect of that
is that they've enabled that in sort of a
profiling kind of a manner such that you
can get to that using the -xprof flag.
So we actually have used that
recently in the past two weeks.
We've used that to improve
the launch time of ADPT-based
applications by two or three seconds.
So what I'd like to do now is--.
I'll show you a little
bit of a demo of that.
And I'm going to have Jens
Alfke join me on stage now.
Jens has a few demos picked up for us.
But if we could get-- there we go.
Let's put this one away.
This demo is going to be in a terminal.
We're not supposed to do that,
but it's really the only way
to show off X-Prof right now.
So I have a command line all set up here.
What I've done is I've CD'd
into the directory of one of
the silly little sample applets
that you all know and love.
This one is Arctest.
And I'm going to run Java command.
I'm paranoid because this is a demo,
so I'm going to force it to use Hotspot.
And I'm using the magic -X-Prof flag.
And then the regular Java arguments,
in this case just Arctest,
the name of the main class.
So what's going to happen is that
it's going to launch Arctest normally,
but every time a thread finishes,
it's going to spit out to the console
some profiling data about that thread.
So as we launch Arctest,
which is going to come
up in the background,
you'll first see the main thread finish,
and it dumps out some stuff there.
Here's Arctest.
Do a little bit of stuff with it.
that we...
quit Arctas,
and then all the other threads finish,
and we see their profiling
information get dumped out too.
So what is this stuff?
It's really pretty easy to
interpret compared to the
profiling output from JDK 1.1.
It's not quite as in-depth,
but it's fairly easy to read.
So first, we've got the thread name here,
main.
And first it's going to show
us the profiling data for the
stuff that got interpreted,
as opposed to the methods
that were running native.
It says that the thread
took 4.13 seconds,
244 ticks.
And this confused me at first.
These are not ticks as in Mac OS ticks,
which are a sixtieth of a second.
Tick here just means samples.
So it depends on how
many times it sampled it.
We spent 18.3% of the time that
this thread was active in JDirect
library OS X dot find symbol,
which is part of the
implementation of JDirect 3,
which actually is what goes out
and maps the native methods to
the actual Carbon or system or
whatever functions that back them up.
And the numbers here mean that
we spent zero seconds inside
of interpreted Java code,
or zero ticks were inside
of interpreted Java code.
Twenty-six ticks were
inside of native code.
Which makes sense.
We spent a whole bunch
of time loading Carbon,
basically, is what this means.
And JDirect looking at Carbon methods
and doing some JNI stuff under
the hood to plug them up.
Then we spent 11.3% of our
time down in view.setGeometry,
which is part of the core clipping
code for heavyweight components.
And again,
that was all spent down in native code.
Down below here, the next group here is
for the same thread,
but this is compiled code.
So this is time spent in actual
methods that have been jitted or
compiled into native code by Hotspot.
And you can see there's
almost nothing here.
The main thread just
doesn't run very long.
It doesn't loop that much.
It's mostly doing initialization stuff.
Since that's the thread where
the app will actually create
the components and initializes
the toolkit and all that stuff.
So these are a bunch of little threads
that aren't doing very much stuff.
AWTEventQ0, you'll find is generally
where most of the real work is
happening in any Java application.
That's the event dispatch thread.
Here we spent 20% of our time down in
cgsgraphics.awt2quartz draw a line.
And so this is where we actually
call into Quartz to draw lines.
And so you'd expect, yeah,
in your typical kind of AWT type app,
that's where you're going to
be spending a lot of your time.
So as I said,
this is pretty straightforward stuff.
It's not going to give you the entire
stack crawl of how you got to this method
where you were spending all of your time,
the way the old profiler did.
And it does have to be
run from a terminal,
but both of those limitations
are being worked on.
And I think by the time we ship,
things will be better.
Thanks, Jens.
Get the other slide back up.
Okay, so the traditional profiling
stuff inside the Java VM,
HProf,
we actually haven't run that recently,
so on Classic we believe it works.
So we strongly advise you
to join that mailing list,
Mac OS X Java, that our DTS folks run.
Alan Samuels will get up and
tell you where that's at again.
And join us and help tell us
what's there and what's useful to
you and share some tips on that.
We strongly believe that the
JVMPI is going to be a super
interface that third parties,
some of whom may be sitting
in this room right now,
are going to be able to take
advantage of right away.
We have talked with some
folks about this already,
and it's our strong hope that
we get some rather awesome
tools coming onto our platform.
The profiling interface lets you,
when it's fully operational,
tells you all kinds of things
about object allocation,
the stacks that were in existence
when objects came along.
It's a very, very powerful interface,
and we think that this is going to bring
development on X a leap forward compared
to some of the C-based environments
where these tools are harder to use.
to accomplish.
So,
just as in wiring up a house or wiring
up a circuit board or something,
you have debugging to do.
So, again,
what you have in TP4 is a classic
interpreter that we've been
shipping for a long time that has
a debugger interface that works.
So,
just as in wiring up a house or wiring
up a circuit board or something,
you have debugging to do.
So, again, with Hotspot,
we have one that almost
works but doesn't quite.
And so, there are folks last week working
hard on getting the debugger
interface up and running.
Unfortunately,
we didn't quite get it where we
needed it to be for this demo today.
So, I can't quite show you
JVMDI running on Hotspot today,
but you can expect that that
will be there very shortly.
And again, we're going to try to figure
out how to get updates to you so
that you can see that as well.
So, what's on your disk?
is
A debugger interface that
works in a classic environment.
So again, you have to go to the command
line to get use of that.
You have to go to JDB to see that.
So you should be using JDB-T classic
to fire up the runtime and get to set
breakpoints and that kind of stuff.
Obviously,
we don't think this is the way you
really ought to be doing debugging.
And so we've been working with folks
on the project builder team to make
this a much more pleasant environment.
And we do have some
success stories with that.
And I think Jens is going to share one
of those with you a little bit later.
So the truth is,
you're going to have to find out-- if
you need to do JDB-level debugging,
you're going to have to find out
how to launch this thing from
the command line at the moment.
So, if you happen to write
those JNI libraries,
then you're writing in C.
And so, it might happen that you don't
write perfect code the first time.
It might happen that you'll be interested
in running GDB on that part of your
program that's written in C that gets
called into across the JNI interface.
In which case,
you need to learn how to launch
GDB on the real Java binary.
So, the real Java binary is kind of
wedged off in that little moral
equivalent of MRJ libraries.
It's wedged in the Java VM framework.
And so, mentally concatenate the
first two lines of this slide.
The font on this system,
or for the slides, wasn't all that good.
So,
you might want to learn how to do that.
You essentially have
to GDB the true Java,
you know, bring up executable in order to
get attached to that process.
There are a few things that you can do.
If you run with classic,
you don't have to run with classic.
But if you run with classic,
the next two lines,
the call dump threads and
the call dump monitors work.
And these are, to some degree,
the equivalents to some
of the MRJD commands.
That let you inside the runtime
and see what's going on in
a little bit more detail.
The last line is simply
GDB syntax for doing a backtrace
on all different threads.
So, that'll give you some
idea of what's going on,
which ones have some of your
code in the middle of it.
So I'm a little bit, I mean,
I'm optimistic, but I'm also a realist.
So given that the hotspot that we have,
oh, now we're going to skip the
debugging demo right now.
We're going to do that
a little bit later.
Given that the hotspot you
have is actually fairly young,
it's very mature technology and it runs
Everything we can throw at it,
except that it's not fully functional,
but it's very solid.
But there might be some occasions
where you'll trip across something
that doesn't quite work right.
So one thing you can do for us is help,
you know, for yourselves,
but is determine whether or
not some strange crash you
see is your fault or ours.
So if your Java code crashes,
one thing that you could do right away
is just try running it in Classic.
Since it's a whole different technology
underneath and it may well work there.
That's not proof positive
that it's our fault,
but it's a good signal that it might be.
So if your code runs in Classic but
doesn't with the default hotspot,
you can do us a favor by running it
with that debug version of hotspot.
Because, again,
there's lots of assertions in there and
if there's something funky going on,
which might actually be your fault,
if you're passing in something
that's not your fault,
you're going to have
to run it in Classic.
Blaine Garst Blaine Garst: Yeah.
So if you're passing in, say,
a zero for a JNI environment pointer,
the debug version of hotspot's going
to catch that and throw an assertion,
whereas the compiled version
of that won't or might not.
So there are some cases where it
might catch some things that are your
fault and it certainly will catch
things earlier if they are our fault.
And so obviously if you find
something that is our fault,
we want to know about it.
And so I'm putting my email address
up there right now for that.
You can mail us an email
at jni.com/hotspot.
me the details of that,
and I'll see that we get
some attention paid to that.
Clearly,
if you're on our discussion list,
Mac OS X Java discussion list,
folks out there might well want to
know a little bit about it also.
So, again,
this is how you set up the Hotspot
There is an underbar
between hotspot and debug.
It's hardly visible on this monitor,
but anyway.
So don't forget those underbars.
They are important.
OK, so again, this is a Unix environment.
How many of you out there have
been exclusively MRJ programmers?
Okay, there's just a few hands.
And so let me try to ask
a different question.
How many of you have already
programmed in sort of a
UNIX or a Windows environment?
The vast majority.
So you all know what this
is going to be about.
Okay, so how do you build, you know,
a JNI support library?
You write some Java code with natives,
you compile it with Java C,
you build the C header as necessary,
you then copy the C header
over as your template and
start hacking in your C code.
You build the library.
About the only thing that's
different about this on Mac OS X is
that the ending library,
you know, the end of the library
There are two different types
of libraries on Mac OS X.
One's called a bundle,
and the other's called-- there
are several kinds of libraries.
There are two types of dynamic libraries.
One is called a bundle,
and the other is called
a dynamic library.
So we happen to like
the bundle variant of--
the libraries for our purposes.
And so from a command line viewpoint,
this is a very simple way
to build one of those guys.
You just remember the dash bundle magic.
But, I mean, this is kind of messy,
and what we really want to do is put all
this stuff inside of Project Builder.
And so one of our friends
on the Project Builder team,
Dave Ewing, has been staying up
till midnight his time,
which is Denver time,
trying to make this stuff happen.
So I'd like to bring Jens back
up on stage to see what some
of this might look like inside
Project Builder where it belongs.
Let's get the monitor.
Can you put it on both screens this time?
I don't know whether that's easy or not.
I'm bringing up a PBX project
showing a very simple JNI example.
Blaine wrote the JNI example,
and then Dave Ewing made the PBX project,
so I'm just here to be
Vanna White and show it off.
We have a couple of files here.
We have calcengine.c,
which is our native code.
It just contains a couple of JNI methods.
I'm not going to go into too much
detail because there's not time in
this talk to really explain JNI.
A number of you have probably used it,
and there are some very good books
out there and a Java soft tutorial.
CalcEngine.java, then-- and besides,
you probably can't read the text on here
anyway unless you're in the front row.
So we have a couple of
native methods in here,
which are what are going to get
bound into that native code.
What's interesting in here,
and this is just the tantalizing
promise because you can't
actually do this in DP4,
but you're getting used to that line,
is we have three targets here.
We have the Java target.
which has the
calcengine.java source file.
And we have a shell script here
that's been cleverly set up.
So we're going to run bin sh and
we're going to run this script
that calls user bin java h,
run that on calcengine.
So that's the post-processing step.
So after we compile the Java,
we run java h on it,
which then generates the
header file declaring what
the native JNI functions are.
Then we have a second target
here for our JNI library itself,
which is a regular kind of C target
containing the calcengine.c source file,
the calcengine.h file that got
generated by the Java target.
And this one,
the product type here is a library,
which is going to build a regular
OS X bundle dynamic library.
Then we have a third target,
and if you're used to Code Warrior,
this will be second nature.
We have a third target
called CalcExample,
which is just an aggregate target.
And the other targets
appear down in here,
which means that they are linked to it.
They're dependent on it,
or it's dependent on them.
So building the CalcExample
target will then build first the
Java target and then the JNI target
and cause everything to be generated.
And as Blaine alluded to earlier,
the demo gods were not happy.
We sacrificed beefy giblets to them,
but they really wanted the tuna
and egg and became very angry.
So we can't actually build this stuff.
It's actually more like
file permission issues.
But I would have shown it running.
But you can just kind of imagine that,
yes, it's going to kind of
run and do its stuff.
We will ship this demo project in this
fabled upcoming release where we have
the PBX support for doing the JNI stuff.
And that's it.
Did I say PBX?
Yes.
Okay.
So, I think one thing in there that you
probably maybe noticed was that we had
like four methods that were wrapped,
like add, subtract, divide, multiply.
And I mean,
those were the names of the C functions,
and those were in fact the names
of the native methods that were
going to give you access to that.
So, if you've been on MRJ before,
you know that that kind of a mapping
is like kind of tedious in some ways.
So,
there is in MRJ a better way to do that,
and that has been called JDirect.
And so, we have JDirect 3 on
Mac OS X that both helps us out
and can help you out with that.
And so,
JDirect 3 is pretty much the same.
as JDirect 2 from your perspective,
not entirely the same,
but pretty doggone the same.
And that's due to the heroic
efforts of Nick Kledzik,
who put together a JDirect 3 package,
which is pretty much entirely
rewritten underneath.
But from your perspective,
it's not going to be that much different.
I will go a little bit into what
is different about JDirect 3.
So, along with the metaphor,
JDirect 3 is kind of like
your virtual electrician.
You bring this electrician in and he
does all this wiring for you and you
don't have to do very much work at all.
So,
if you've got gobs of existing code or if
you look under you in those C frameworks
that are below us all and find C code
that's kind of interesting to you,
and this has been true in the
past and it probably may well
still be true in the future,
and you happen to be a little bit
decaffeinated as a programmer and don't
want to write all those little methods,
even if Project Builder makes
it just easy as you can think,
the solution is to let
JDirect possibly write those.
So,
we use C functions that glue between the
native JNI argument type implementations
and the C functions that are being
supplied to you somewhere else.
For the AWT, as I said,
this is technology that we've
been using for a long time.
QuickTime also uses this technology.
And so, you know, it's been there before.
We know about it,
and you can count on it as well.
So briefly, how do you get this virtual
electrician to do its job?
And so,
What it needs is the name of the
library that contains those C functions,
You know, can't-- it's not going to go
grep and end M the system to
find the functions for you.
And you need to tell it which class
has those native declarations.
That's a pretty simple contract, right?
Tell it where the library is,
tell it-- tell it what functions you
want written for-- on your behalf.
And so,
you have to tell it in these two ways.
You tell the name of the library in
a static string inside that class
that has those native methods.
There are other options as well.
And then you tell the-- then you
hand the class itself to the,
you know, to the constructor of
this Jdirect function.
So, I actually have a little bit of code
here to show you how easy it is.
You can read the code, right?
The first line is that string,
JDirect_MacOS10.
has the value prime.dialibs.
Presumably,
prime has this very fancy super calc
engine kind of technology underneath it.
You tell,
you ask JDirect in the second line,
second functional line,
to go ahead and build
those stub functions.
So you hand it prime.class.
Now,
note that this is the prime.class itself,
so you're just using that fancy 1.1.class
directive to hand it prime.class.
You hand an instance of,
or hand the class description
into JDirect itself.
JDirect uses reflection to go find out
what methods to write native codes for,
allocates some C memory,
writes some C functions in that C memory,
jams them into a funky
little JNI object itself,
and hands you back the handle to all
those gizmos in that thing called,
that we store in linkage.
So you actually need to
hold on to that object,
that linkage object,
because if you're going to do that,
you're going to have to
do it in a different way.
If you don't,
it will be garbage collected.
And if it's garbage collected and
you try to access those functions,
well,
we're not going to help you with that.
So the last line of this is
the actual method that we're,
in this example, trying to do.
If I would have had more
lines on this slide,
I would have done the four methods
that were in the earlier example.
So anyway, JDirect 3 is, in this example,
absolutely simple to use.
So you ought to note, though,
that JDirect 3 is a rather
interesting set of technology.
So you can have,
there's a slight difference
in the types of arguments you
can use with it in JDirect 3.
You can use scalars and arrays,
and arrays of scalars,
although arrays of Booleans,
I understand, aren't quite there.
You cannot pass objects, however.
We don't have any way to really map
objects in any intelligent fashion.
What we're doing under the covers
is... In the case of arrays,
is we're actually copying the
bits out of the runtime into
a privately allocated memory,
rummaging with it,
and then when we're done with it,
copying it back in.
This is the contract that JNI has
for gaining access to arrays.
So we haven't seen issues with that,
even for QuickTime.
So it's just a note for you.
As I mentioned earlier,
there are different ways to
name different libraries.
If you put that in a library,
you can name it.
You can put the same string
inside of an interface,
and then if your class
implements that interface,
JDirect will do reflection on the
interfaces and find those strings.
And so you can have several libraries
that hold the implementations of a set of
methods that are described in one class.
You can write code that runs on JDirect
2 in the 118 environment on MRJ.
In that environment,
we tune the runtime to look
for a very magic... interface.
And so if you extended that interface,
we knew how to... We knew to
call the invoker... Or call the
factory to do that glue bindery.
We will be writing a tech note for that.
And so if that's important to you,
then it is possible.
It's not too bad.
Again, that last line I told you about,
you have to hold onto the results
of that in order to keep it working.
So final note,
one of those frameworks underneath
that might be interesting to
you is the Carbon framework.
The toolbox has now been carbonized,
and AWT uses the carbonized toolbox.
The contract there is that you cannot go
rummaging inside a lot of Carbon objects
as you used to be able to do on MRJ.
So you have to use the accessor
functions just like everybody else does.
So in this case,
we have an example where you have to
use the accessor functions instead
of going off to some magic offset
and pulling out the data yourself.
Finally, our diagram again.
What happens when you need to take
an entire Java environment and
put it inside another application?
That is what we used
to do with JManager 2,
and we have a successor to that,
and we don't have a name for it yet.
I guess it's the embedding
story for Mac OS X.
The person who can best speak
to this is none other than Jens.
I'll call him back up to stage
and see if he can run you
through some of these examples.
He will obviously speak more
knowledgeably about it than I will.
Thanks.
So we talk about wiring Java into
your Carbon application.
There's a little asterisk there because
we would eventually like this to be able
to work for Cocoa applications as well,
but the technology to do so
isn't quite available yet.
So first the bad news.
For all of you JManager fans,
JManager is not supported on OS X.
The good news is that,
well it's actually good news that
JManager 2 is not supported because
it's a very complicated API.
It requires you to do a lot
of work in your application.
Everybody who did it ended up doing
it in kind of slightly different
ways and causing incompatibilities
for us and our developers,
which is actually kind of our
fault in the design of the API.
So the good news is that we have a
new API and the API is very simple
because we now have a modern,
we now have a much more modern
environment to work in so we don't
have the same kind of limitations
we did back when we did JDirect 2.
So there are a couple of different
pieces to what you need to do.
First you need to obviously get
Java running and you use absolutely
cross platform standard JNI,
in fact the JNI Indication
API to do that.
You need to describe the kind of
code that is that you want to embed.
In this case,
we're talking about applets,
since that's the primary target,
is the web browser or other
application that can show applets.
You can also use other kinds of code.
You fill out a fairly simple struct
with the information about the
location or the contents of the applet.
Then you create a
Java control or a Java window.
Yes,
we are using the control manager now.
So for better or for worse,
the control manager is the
sort of component story for X,
at least in Carbon.
And we have a Java control that you
do by going create Java control.
And that is mostly all
there is to the story.
Once the control is there,
you need to be a good host to controls.
You need to make sure that your controls,
in particular the Java control,
get all the events that they need.
And I'll talk about that
in more detail in a minute.
We have a sort of preview of this in DP4,
which is mostly just a header file you
can look at and start thinking about.
This much promised future
add-on release will have a
functional implementation of it.
So the first step, as I said,
is to use JNI to start up
the Java virtual machine.
And this is exactly how you do it.
We typed this in ourselves.
We could have torn it out of
Sun's Java tutorial or any of the
JNI books that are out there at
your favorite computer bookstore.
First of all, we set up this Java VM in
the arg structure,
which is what tells the Java virtual
machine all the different parameters
it needs for starting up things
like the default heap size,
stack size, things like that.
And we don't care about--we're
just going to use the default.
So we fill in the version number
in the struct and call JNI get
default Java VM init args.
And that's going to fill out the
structure for us with the default values.
And if you wanted to tweak some
of those values to increase the
heap size or something like that,
you could do it after that.
Then all we need is JNI create Java VM.
That's going to initialize the
Java VM for us and start it up.
And it returns us a JVM structure,
Java VM structure,
which is rarely needed,
and a JNI end structure,
which is always needed for JNI calls.
So we need to save that one off.
Second step is making this magic
struct that tells our embedding code
where the code you want to run is.
In this case,
we have a simple example where we're
giving it a file path to a local
applet that's in our hard disk.
So we create this MRJ applet
descriptor struct.
We do a bit of core foundation magic to
create a URL given a Unix style path.
And we null out the
rest of the structure.
If you wanted to,
you could also use a real HTTP or
whatever URL to specify that.
You can also provide a different
code base and doc base.
You can also pass in the contents,
the raw contents of the applet tag or
a pre-parsed set of applet properties.
The latter will be more useful to
you if you're a web browser and
you've already been parsing the HTML.
The second step then is to take
this MRJ code descriptor and stuff
the applet descriptor into it,
applets being only one of the ways
that you can use to tell which
kind of code you want to embed.
Finally, then we embed the control.
We need a bounds rectangle
that will fill out
And then we call Create Java Control,
passing in the JNI environment,
the window we want the
control to go into,
the bounding box,
and then the code descriptor.
And as usual,
the last one is an out parameter that
actually returns the control back to us.
And that's it.
Behind the scenes,
the embedding library is going
to start up an applet context,
go out and load the applet,
start up the appropriate threads for it,
send it the events,
and do some magic stuff with AWT so
that the frame that the applet
gets embedded into is actually the
control in a portion of your window.
So you need to be able to run controls.
And for the most part, this is kind of--
Java program or Mac programming
101 type of stuff.
There's actually really no extra
work to handle Windows that come up.
If you--
If you want the applet
to come up in a window,
or if the applet opens up its
own windows after the fact,
they simply pop up as
windows in your layer.
And the nice thing is that Carbon's event
manager does all the work of making sure
that events for those windows go to those
windows and not into your event loop.
So about all you have to do is make
sure that you don't step on them.
You don't inadvertently,
when you're traversing the window list,
go and assume that it's one of
your windows and dereference the
refcon and cast it to your struct
and try to do stuff with it.
Just pay attention to which windows
are yours and which ones aren't.
The same deal goes for menus.
If an AWT window is active,
it will append menus to your menu bar.
And it will remove them
when it becomes inactive.
And if you go around traversing
the menu bar for whatever reason,
you need to pay attention to which menus
belong to you and which ones don't.
And there are some accessor functions
in the API that will help you
determine whether or not this menu
or this window belongs to Java.
For controls, you need to make sure that
all the relevant events
are dispatched to controls.
And in Mac Programming
101 back in the 1984 days,
the only kind of things that
controls really got were clicks,
because the controls were just limited
things like buttons and check boxes.
With the Appearance Manager,
in the last couple of years,
things have gotten a lot more
sophisticated and controls can
now--they can now have focus,
they can get key presses,
they can do cursor tracking
while the cursor's over them,
they can do drag and drop.
So there are several new calls in
controls.h that are there to allow you
to pass those events into the controls.
It isn't that much more work to do.
There's about three more places in
your event loop where you need to
do the right kind of control stuff.
And the Appearance Manager SDK has
all the sample code for how
to do that sort of thing.
But the real--the real way to do it,
the good way to do it is to have your
app adopt the new Carbon event model.
If you attended any of the
sessions on that yesterday,
you'll know that the Carbon event
model is incredibly cool.
And it's just a vast step forward
for the way Mac applications work.
Events are dispatched to the
objects that they're intended for.
It's a lot more like you're
used to with Java programming,
where if there's an
activate event for a window,
well,
the Windows event--the Windows event
handler will get that event.
If there's an event for a control,
the controls event handler
will get that event.
There's no need for the Windows event
loop even to get involved.
So you get all of this stuff
basically for free if you're
using the Carbon event model.
You put the control on your
window and it just runs itself.
At the bottom here,
I have a list of some of the new
appearance functions that you'll need
to use with an old style event loop,
create root control, handle control,
click, et cetera.
And if that's the way you're doing it,
then I encourage you to go out
and look at the control manager
documentation that came out with the
appearance manager and with OS 8.5.
They're described pretty well in there.
So, now I get to be my own demo boy and
run the demo back here on this machine.
So I wrote an app pretty quickly
that shows off this stuff.
And since I wanted to
do it pretty quickly,
I used the Carbon Event Model.
And what I ended up with--
This is probably a little
too small for you to read.
This is four pages of code,
of which the first about two and a
half are some kind of generic stuff to
Create a new window,
add some event handlers to the window,
create a text control so we
have a text field where we
can type in the applet path,
add some listeners to that,
create a push button so we
can push it to run the applet.
very standard Carbon event stuff.
We have a window listener function,
the text control listener function,
And then down here we have the meat,
and this all fits on one
screen with a little type.
We first have
Yeah.
Down here we have the
JNI invocation stuff.
And this is almost exactly as it
appeared on the slide earlier.
We call JNI getDefault, VM init args,
and then JNI createJavaVM.
And again,
the stuff that shows the applet
is almost exactly as it appears.
We create a CFStringRef for the path,
the CFURLRef, and
Then we call Create Java Control.
And again,
I'm mostly showing the source code
just to point out how small this is.
There's four pages of code.
It took me a very short
amount of time to write.
And the application
itself looks like this.
So being that it's a
Carbon Events application,
we get all these behaviors
for free-- window dragging,
window resizing, et cetera.
Text field runs.
We'll run draw test.
Another one of these
silly sample applets.
Push the Run button,
and here's our applet.
We can resize the window.
Everything redraws
itself as you'd expect.
Movable.
This applet doesn't
happen to do text input,
but that works as well.
[Transcript missing]
One more thing to do though.
One more thing.
Yeah.
The debugging demo.
The debugging will not work.
The demo gods were angry.
Pardon?
We will not be able to
build the application,
so we can't run it.
I tell you, hours worth of work.
Jens, are you ready to swear in
front of all these people?
Did debugging work?
I solemnly swear that debugging worked.
We were able to set breakpoints.
Yay, we were even able to step through
the code and view stack traces.
It was good.
It truly is good.
Project Builder,
which is the intro session
that's going on right next to us,
which you're not seeing.
You've seen a little bit
of Project Builder here.
Project Builder is really looking good.
We know how to hook up
debugging inside of there.
Dave Ewing is really doing a
great job making all that happen.
And we worked really hard to try
to get that here to show you,
because we honestly don't believe
that JDB is the way for you guys
to go out and debug Java stuff.
Let me try it.
Let me try to see that.
Well, there's nothing like praying.
OK, if we all bow and cross our fingers.
We're just totally
living on the edge now,
but if we fall down on our pants,
please apologize.
We'll apologize.
So if we can run this thing,
then-- so Dave,
should I set the breakpoint now?
It's in Project Builder.
I just hit run.
You need to hit debug.
How would you debug?
Make sure the debugger's
set to the Java debugger.
Yeah.
[Transcript missing]
Do we have breakpoints set?
It says it's waiting to connect.
Is this because we're running Hotspot,
isn't it?
No.
Yeah, you're right.
Sure.
That'll help.
You've got to run Java in
order to debug Java,
it turns out.
See, we're loading it lazily.
That wasn't good, was it?
Forget I tried anything.
It worked great before.
OK, back to the slides.
Okay, so basically,
we know that we've been postponing
a lot of questions until now,
so we're trying to leave a little
bit of time for some questions here.
So, you should remember, Java is,
you know,
wired into the walls of Mac OS X.
You shouldn't be shocked
at what you find on DP4,
because we're going to make it better.
I'm going to point everybody to
Alan Samuel to make sure that you
know that he's the guy you need
to ask about all the updates.
Not me.
Ask him.
So the take home exam,
we had a pop quiz at the beginning.
Well,
I want to just carry the metaphor going,
for you to take home.
Write a JNI-enabled Java class,
debug your code using a profile of
your code to make sure it runs fast,
throw away the JNI stuff,
use JDirect instead.
And finally,
since embedding is so simple, I mean,
it looks like almost I can program that.
And well, anyway, I don't do GUI.
But it'll look simple
enough for me to use.
So it ought to be simple
enough for you guys to use.
Roadmap, we only got one other
Java session this year at WWDC,
and it immediately follows this one.
So if you have marketing style questions,
if you have kudos for
us or non-kudos for us,
take those to the feedback forum
to find out where we fit in
relationship to the rest of the
world of Java and things like that.
For this session, if you've got technical
questions about how something
happens and things like that,
what I'd like to do is call
up members of the Java team.
You guys can hit the mics and
ask us anything else you want.